In the undergraduate pre-veterinary courses, I had girls.
In fact, I started dating Martha.
She was taking a course in bacteriology at the same time I was.
So this is the University of Missouri.
She didn't get off on that.
But anyway, we started dating, and the fellow sitting next to her was never there.
So I moved down there and started sitting there all the time.
Well, the instructor took role every day.
And I made pretty good grades.
In fact, I was making 100 on the quizzes.
And he'd give a quiz once a week.
And he really worried how this guy who was never there could make good grades.
And finally Martha said, you better go tell him someday that you're here.
So I finally told him.
And he was relieved.
I said, gee, I thought my exams were out.
Somebody stole my quizzes.
And she was cheating.
So anyway, but it's always used to the girls being in class.
As far as teaching them, it
Of course, I generally told jokes that weren't, I guess you'd call, raw jokes.
In fact, the last joke I told, other than knowing myself, was about a deaf duck, and I'll never forget that.
And I didn't realize it was the first day of class, one of the girls in the class was deaf.
Oh.
Yeah, and that really, I felt bad about that.
I apologized to her, but she's been friendly to me ever since, and she was on the faculty for a long period of time.
It's just one of the students told me,
I can't remember her name, this is deaf, you know, it didn't.
But she had somebody with carbon paper underneath their notes and she had a recording there and she had to play it to somebody else and they'd write out her notes for it that she couldn't understand.
So I quit telling all kinds of jokes, whether they're deaf ducks or whatever they are.
About how long, about how many years did it take before there was a meaningful number of women enrolled?
Haskell, I can't remember.
It's probably four or five years, I guess.
I remember we had Sonia.
It seemed like there wasn't one the next year.
Then there were two or three.
The first big class, I think it was three, and it had Big Mama Magda.
Great big gals, arm wrestle with the students, and she was pretty crude.
And after that, they started getting more and more.
Now during that time, we had a contract with Louisiana.
Right, LSU, yeah.
Louisiana, yeah.
And it was, what did they have, six out of 64?
Something like that, right, yeah.
And they were always very good students.
They were always interesting students, too.
They always added life to the class.
And they were certainly accepted.
Oh, yeah.
Definitely.
Because they were sharp and there were one or two of them that went a little bit different.
I've heard from one of them occasionally that although he was pretty sharp, he just wasn't very practical.
He couldn't apply it and he had problems doing that.
For the most part, they were very well accepted and, in fact, be class leaders to a great degree, yeah.
How long before do you remember the first black students?
Yeah, I remember the first black student.
Oh, gosh.
And he ended up in the meat inspection.
He's in the USDA.
In fact, last I saw he was a supervisor or a district supervisor in several states.
I flunked him.
I flunked him too.
The dean said, well, you ought to go back and give him another exam and let him, I mean, so I gave him some material to read
At the end of the next semester, I gave him another exam and he passed, but oh gosh, what's his name?
He was the first black student.
And he had no problems?
He had no problems.
He just didn't.
I mean that there was nothing about his being not well received.
Oh, no, no, no.
Nothing about him.
That's why I felt bad about flunging him, but he had a very low grade and he was, you know, even if you curve it, he'd be down low, so.
All right.
Your opinion.
Do you think if we'd had a vote of the veterinary faculty at that time, would there have been a different vote on the admission of women or the admission of black students?
By that you mean would they say yes or no?
What would the faculty vote?
The faculty would vote no on both of them, I think.
On both?
I think so, yeah.
Would there have been a larger number voting no against blacks or against women?
Against women.
That would have been my guess.
Some still were very upset.
And I presume there were some Hispanic youngsters always.
Yeah, oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Some, there was some discrimination there too.
I shouldn't say that, but there was.
I remember one student who,
One of the faculty advisors told me he'd never get into vet school.
He just wanted to go home.
And he came in with his mother and father, and they were little people.
And somebody at home comes to me, and I talked to him.
That kid got in school, vet school, and he's practiced, successful practice in El Paso.
I see him every now and then.
That guy makes you proud at least.
But some of them are looked down on, as you well know.
Now, how in those early years, how were you evaluated, what was the evaluation process for a faculty member?
We didn't have any formal evaluation forms, anything like that.
It's more or less, I guess, hearsay.
I never received any.
Dr. Jagger never called me in and said, well, you ought to do this, this, and this, or you're not doing this well enough.
If you get complaints, well, he'd talk to me about it, but there was no set evaluation procedure.
There was no annual review type of thing.
Did he ever chat with you and give you any?
Advice or counsel or tell you what?
Sometimes, yeah, sometimes, you know.
But I can't remember any specific incident where it was at, you know.
And salary increases were, they weren't uniform, were they?
No, they weren't uniform.
No, they were very far apart.
Is that right?
Yeah.
How did you feel you were being treated?
on salaries and promotions?
For quite a while, I felt like maybe not too well, yeah, not too well.
And then when did that change, you said?
That changed probably, I know it changed after,
After Dr. Jaggi retired, Dr. Flowers was a little bit more free, and then Dr. Hydeball was probably the best of all for changing salaries.
But it was fairly, fairly, fairly slow.
And as far as you were aware, were in terms of your promotion and your salary, were you being, keeping pace with others of your, your similar colleagues?
You mean at other schools?
No, no, no.
Oh, here?
No, it's obvious some departments are very, very much better treated, yeah, yeah.
The word gets out.
Okay.
And, of course, they used to publish the book, put it over in the library.
Oh, yeah, that's right.
And every now and then people said, you ought to go and look the book.
Now, I regret it.
I ever went to look the thing I did and it makes you.
A little bit upset, but there were certain departments, department heads were much more effective in getting the money.
In terms of grading, those of us across the tracks, we in that era, we put our grades on the door of our office and students would come by and look.
Did you all post grades over here?
No, no.
Not that way.
So, and did you ever?
Go ahead.
I was going to say, did the students give you a nickname or give your courses a nickname?
They probably did, but I ignored it.
But you didn't know what it was?
No.
Okay.
When did this trimester system, it was in effect in the 60s and up into the 70s, when did the class size increase?
Class size increased.
When subvention rates went in, federal subvention rates and Haskell, I can't remember the exact time, but they went up fairly quick.
Was it under Dean Price?
Yes.
It was.
Yeah, yeah.
Went up to 96 and 128 and then we got about 132 for a while.
You were a while ago mentioned Mr. Rutter.
What did you and your colleagues, what do you think was the typical opinion of the School of Veterinary Medicine to the leadership across the tracks?
What do you think they thought of Mr. Rutter?
And over here what they thought of Rudder?
I think they pretty well respect him.
They knew he was, they feared him too.
Did he come over here to visit some?
No, I never remember him coming over here to visit.
I never heard of it.
Uh-huh, no.
And did you all see much of Vice President Wayne Hall?
Some occasionally, yeah, some occasionally.
But it was more like just walking around campus than here, yeah.
We called them Water Closets, is that right?
That's right.
That was a nickname for him.
Do you remember any reaction when you heard that Mr. Rutter had died?
I thought there was a lot of sad people that we had lost a good fighter, a good leader.
And then Jack Williams.
Jack Williams, there was mixed reactions to him and I don't know why.
He seemed always, you know, when you see him in fact to me, he seemed always very straightforward and very, you know, cordial.
I guess maybe he didn't seem to be as outspoken and as,
I don't want to say tough, you might say, as Errol Rudder.
I guess that's it.
I know some people didn't think much of him.
I don't know why.
I liked him.
All right.
Now, he's the one that made the decision on women's dorms and all that.
Yeah.
And the enrollment really begins to grow.
Did you all begin to think that veterinary medicine, the College of Veterinary Medicine, was making progress?
At that time, probably not, no.
Yeah.
Really?
I'm trying to put it in perspective.
See, he gets here in November of 70.
Okay.
Sorry, I can't think.
By that time, did you feel pretty deeply rooted here?
Did you think about going elsewhere?
70?
Yeah, I thought about going elsewhere.
I've been given some offers other places.
By the time I interviewed up at Kansas State, and Martha I don't think really wanted to leave.
She liked it here.
But they offered me a position up there, but it ended up I'd have to
my salary would have to be cut to go up there.
They were in worse shape than we were, so.
I told them I had to have the same salary and moving expenses if the, and the, so it never worked out, yeah.
And were you beginning to feel relatively comfortable here?
Yeah, pretty much so, yeah, yeah.
Whom did, who, did you have a close friend in those early years, a close?
Yeah, well,
Tom Galvin lived down the street from us.
He was in parasitology and we were fairly close.
We would ride together to work and share cars.
Each family just had one car so we'd do that.
And he had gone to Tulane for graduate school so we had some common friends and knowledge and this type of thing.
All right, and now let's talk about off-campus life for you and the family at that time.
You all took vacations where or when?
Our vacations were generally with the, that time we always had to go see the grandparents, of course, in Missouri.
And then I guess 65 I started going to AVMA conventions, so Martha I don't think went with me until about 70 I guess.
We used to take, you know, kids when we couldn't go.
And they would be held different places across.
Yeah, different places throughout the country.
So as far as true vacations, we never took any where you went just, you know, off to go somewhere like Yellowstone.
We went, you know, go see the grandparents or go to AVMA conventions and Martha go with me.
That was it.
And the kids got involved in what extracurricular activities that involved mom and dad?
That's a good question.
Little league, piano lessons?
Yeah, little league, yeah.
Little league, piano one.
Brian took piano lessons.
We both got a little bit in tennis for a while.
Curtis Little League, that type of thing.
All right, and they're in the Bryan School District?
Yeah, they're in the Bryan School District, yes.
And then at church, well, not yet Sunday night youth activities.
No, I don't think so.
Okay.
I don't remember much about youth activities Sunday night.
We didn't have much then.
What led you to get to going regularly to the AVMA?
Just the fact you needed the best way to keep up on most recent knowledge, most recent science.
Did you develop some close relationships with some professionals at other places that were working on similar?
Right.
Also, there's other meetings I would attend.
There's one for teachers of food safety.
The USDA generally sponsored that once a year in Chicago, so you got to know people through that.
And it was always about how to teach various things.
Also, I'd go to meetings at CDC occasionally.
They'd have programs there on epidemiology and on
In fact, diseases are public health important, so you get to know people in your particular category that way.
So primarily, I guess, going to governmental sponsored meetings and learning more about various things you can use in teaching.
In that era, did y'all have to pay your own transportation cost or did we?
Pretty much so, yeah.
We didn't have hardly any travel funds here, yeah.
What about research startup money?
I think it was hard to come by, really, research money at that time, yeah.
So that y'all didn't have the same access to ag experiment station money?
We did, but you had to be on Ag Experiment Station staff to do that, and I stayed full-time teaching, so.
Oh, okay.
Okay.
For how long?
I always have, never been on Experiment Station, yeah, yeah.
Nev Clark came in about that time, so I, another reason not to, I shouldn't say that.
I like Nev, but a lot of people really had some poor experiences.
It demanded a lot of time.
I felt like by teaching at first, I did do some research, did get some research grants.
Through the one that, I can't remember, Tetrap.
If you remember that, the competitive one in the state of Texas, I got a big grant from them on rabies.
That's my biggest grant.
Got 310,000 from 1985, I guess.
And I got 100,000 from the Army.
and another 100,000 state health department after that to research grants.
Describe those research projects in layman's language.
Okay.
The big one was primarily to, in fact it was, to develop an anemortem diagnostic test in dogs.
By that I mean a test where you take a blood sample and tell whether they had been exposed to rabies or not.
And now the only way you can tell is you euthanize them and examine the brain.
And so that's what I got a grant to do.
And the test worked out pretty good.
The only problem is
There's several strains of rabies virus, and I did the one that's actually caused the coyote problem in South Texas.
That problem then was the Mexican, Mexico City virus.
It was the hottest one.
And we could tell about three or four days before the animals came down with any clinical science, they had a rabies virus.
And you could differentiate
whether it was due to wild virus, their blood reaction or vaccination titer.
So we worked that out, worked out pretty good.
Now that project lasted how long?
That lasted three years.
Three years?
Yeah.
And you and how many students?
I had one, two, three,
Four, four students I think, four students.
One Ph.D., two Ph.D.
and two masters.
And when did you first start directing graduate students?
Gosh, Haskell came here, I guess 66 probably after I got my Ph.D.
and started doing a few small projects.
I had small projects.
Had one, you get some funds, there'd be always some local funds, not big amounts, but Dr. Dalai, I remember Dr. James Dalai, a toxicologist, he called me one night, one Sunday night, that the child had eaten some poisonous plant berries, centipberries, if I remember correctly.
And she was in the poison center down at Galveston, wanted to know would that particular barrier cause any problems.
And he said, I couldn't find anything in literature where it would.
So he said, would you look in the literature?
So I looked all through the literature.
I couldn't find anything.
And the problem was that this young child had a very high blood glucose level.
So they didn't know whether this would precipitate diabetes or this was a clinical sign of diabetes, I mean clinical sign of the poisoning.
And we could find nothing in there that indicated it would be.
So they treated it as a diabetic.
But that problem with these particular berries, coyotea, these coyotea berries, are they indeed poisonous?
They're very common.
So I turned in, Grant got some funding.
Maybe that came to the Experiment Station.
I guess I did.
I have to go back with my word.
They gave me some Experiment Station money to experiment in monkeys, get some subhuman primates and feed them the berries and see what happens.
I got some capuchin monkeys.
They looked around, and a rhesus monkey was a standard monkey, but they're big and they're vicious, so somewhere told me, get capuchin monkeys.
That's the organ grinder monkeys.
So I got, I think, 15 of those.
Got them.
And we started studies on those and did show what the coyotea berry would do.
Did all kinds of neurological studies on them.
Some people of physiology wrote some papers on the effect upon the heart, various other things, brain tissue.
As far as the pathology, I worked out a thing with the medical school over in San Antonio.
They'd do some pathology and compare it to human pathology and it worked out real good.
The only problem is I had some monkeys out there and they started breeding and started having young monkeys and we had a big gang cage.
And to make a long story short, we started looking around and we found no one could reproduce those in captivity.
Kind of weird.
So they said it's more valuable to show you can reproduce these monkeys and why they're reproducing.
Anyway, that's kind of an ironic thing.
So we quit the toxicology studies and started doing reproductive studies.
And I had one grad student did his work on, two grad students did reproductive studies on those, got their masters on that.
One of them in town is still selling animal cages, research animal cages.
He got involved, went to work for a research company that makes cages afterwards for monkeys and then one thing led to the next.
The other went lab trying on medicine, went back to Ohio and he passed away a couple years ago.
But it's kind of ironic.
He went from toxic cause to the reproductive science and we did, were able to reproduce them fairly handily in captivity so what that's worth.
And did you, during the 70s, 80s, and 90s, you had research going all the time?
Yeah, I had some going all the time, yeah, yeah.
Did you have funding all the time?
I had some funding, yeah, yeah, funding, yeah.
It wasn't big funding.
Normally, about how many graduate students would you be directing?
Oh, it varied from,
About two or three I guess, yeah.
Have you, do you have a count of how many masters and PhDs?
I have it somewhere, Haskell.
What would be a general guess?
I'd say 30, 35 masters, probably five PhDs.
I'm trying to think, PhDs.
Probably that, yeah, I guess.
Pure rough guess.
Now how, and how would you and those students link up?
How did you, did they come to you or did you?
They'd come to me, yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Can I tell you a story about the first one I had?
Oh please, sure.
The first story was Suzanne Tucheton.
And I'm trying to recall how she came here.
She came here, she wrote and wanted to do a graduate degree on epidemiology.
At that time, we had a doctor's in public health, so I said, well, you can come to a doctor of public and veterinary public health.
She came here.
She's from Iran.
Iran.
This is when the Shah was still in power.
And she had done her degrees where?
In Iran.
Okay.
Now, she was probably, she was already here.
Her husband was getting a degree in economics on campus.
He got his degree and he left and went to teach at Appalachian State.
She stayed on and got her degree, PhD.
I remember my first PhD student.
And we did an epidemiological study on the effect of calcium-sodium ratio in water supplies, municipal water supplies on the coronary heart death rate.
And we did show in the relationship, the higher the sodium to calcium ratio, the higher the death rate.
And we found, it was interesting where we found various parts of the state and you could measure it.
That was her PhD and I thought it was a beautiful PhD.
She left, her husband and her wanted to go back to Iran.
That's about the time that Shaw was disposed of.
Her father was a general in the Shaw's army.
And her husband had similar connections.
And they went back and she says, don't write to me.
I'll write to you when we can.
Because she knew it was going to be tough.
She went back and that was 20, I guess about 22 years ago.
We got a phone call last month from San Francisco.
It was her.
And she didn't know we were still alive.
I kept trying to get in touch with everybody I'd see had been in Iran.
or had moved from there, do you know her?
One or two people knew of her, but they didn't know if she was still alive or not.
We thought she was dead because of her family connections, plus she was educated.
Anyway, she called us last month, and her daughter, who was about this high when she left her, was about three years old,
four years old, has a job in San Francisco and she's there visiting her daughter.
She teaches in a medical school in Tehran, which I thought was ironic.
She's going to try to come back next year and we'll see her, but that's kind of a... Now, I'm assuming this lady was a Muslim.
Yeah, definitely.
Did you run into any problems?
Oh, gosh.
Give some examples.
Okay.
She came to me one day crying.
She graduated crying.
She said, what are you crying about, Suzanne?
She said, I touched a dog.
What do you mean?
She had to take a toxicology course.
I put her in Dr. Bailey's, Merle Bailey's basic graduate toxicology class, and one of the things they do in there is study the effect of various toxins like strychnine on dogs.
She'd never touched a dog in her whole life, and she had to touch this dog and the things around it, and she, it broke her down.
She just cried like mad, and things like that.
Of course, the food she, you know, we had them out to eat,
Had to make sure there wasn't any pork or anything like that in their foods.
It was very interesting.
What about the way she dressed?
How could she... She dressed very continental, very American.
She was worried about that.
She was afraid somebody from over there are going to see me, they're going to report me.
because I'm not wearing my usual habit, whatever you call it.
And she was worried about that when she went back, that she'd be seen wearing those American dresses.
And her capability.
Very good.
Many things with dogs and things, associated dogs and pork, things like that.
I did not know that they could, that a woman could not, a Muslim woman, were there any other animals she could not touch?
I think I saw them, but the dog, she'd never touched a dog in her whole life and she broke down.
She really, and she had to handle this dog in the lab and apparently she started crying and she ran down here.
I still remember coming in.
Do you remember any other personal realities with a graduate student?
Oh, yeah.
I can't stop and think.
There's a lot of them.
None got in trouble with the law.
None you had to bail out.
No, no.
Believe it or not.
None walked away right when they were almost completed.
None walked off.
Yeah, I've lost two or three.
We had one fellow from Taiwan, one from Taiwan that came in here, we had him here for a year and he just vanished, disappeared.
And he's a veterinarian and I heard about a year later that he went to Canada and somehow he got back to California and he was practicing out there.
But he just decided one day he would, and just left.
I had one very interesting graduate student from,
He's from Iraq, he's Iraqi, he's a Kurd.
And he showed up there and he'd been over in animal science and I don't know what happened, but he wanted to get a master's degree.
And anyway, I got to talk to him, so I said, I have to get a degree.
I need a degree to stay here in the States.
I said, well, if I can't you go home?
He said, I'll go home, I'll be killed because Iraqis and Kurds, of course.
He had a hard time and he gave, had the troubles I had with him, he,
had a very condescending attitude towards women.
I mean, he'd talk very terrible to the secretaries and technicians.
He never realized, you know, the difference, because he hadn't been here long.
But he struggled when he finally graduated.
And I saw him not long ago at the HEV parking lot.
So he's still around here somewhere.
And I had another graduate student.
that CDC Centers for Disease Control in North Atlanta, George Baer who was their guru on rabies, this is when I had my rabies project, I told him I need somebody to grow the rabies virus.
And I looked all over the country, I can't find anybody that wants to even touch it.
He says I know a lab in China.
And he got to touch somebody.
Well, next thing you know, I had a student, a potential graduate from China come here.
And he, and finally we got everything arranged.
He came and I went down to pick him up at the airport in Houston.
It was one of those real gully washers.
I mean, it, the streets were flooded up the curbs.
I found out when he got in the car, he'd never been in an automobile before.
First time we'd been in Albuquerque.
We had to drive on the sidewalk to get out down there.
It was so bad.
I looked over him a time or two, you know, as I could have covered my eyes, and he'd tell, he was just as fearful as could be.
We came back here.
About two weeks later, I was talking to him.
I asked him something about how you're going to get there.
I said, I'll drive.
I said, drive?
What do you mean?
In that two-week period of time, he bought a car.
I tell him, where's your driver's license?
My friends say you learn to drive, then get your driver's license.
So he bought a big old car and drive around town here, learned how to drive, and didn't have a driver's license.
So I thought he was going to end up in jail, but he survived.
He stayed with me two years, and then he disappeared.
And come find out, he went over to nuclear engineering.
He went in there as a graduate student and got a PhD in nuclear engineering.
It's kind of scary, but he was a sharp kid.
As you think about all of your master's and doctoral students now, I'm not going to ask the negative, the few that you're most proud to claim, where are they?
Who are they and where are they?
Most proud would be one, Charlie Pixley, who got his PhD working on my rabies project.
He is in San Antonio now.
He's a full colonel, very responsible, charged the laboratories over there, the health science laboratories.
He's doing very well.
With the Army?
Yes, Army.
Doing a great job.
I've got some master's students.
One master's student had been, got his bachelor's degree here and I think
Pretty sure as liberal arts.
Anyway, he went to the Army, came back, wanted to go to vet school.
He went through graduate school, got a master's.